[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Fumbled across in practice.
So I was looking for better
solutions for heart disease.
My mom died of
sudden cardiac death.
She died a couple
of months after
her two-vessel angioplasty.
And that's what I did.
That's what I did in my career.
I spent morning till night
working in the cath lab,
where we did heart
catheterizations
and certain stents
and angioplasty,
those kinds of procedures.
And my own mother dies
a couple of months
after her procedure
in New Jersey.
Well, it got me thinking that
there were better answers than
just having people come to a
hospital-- a procedure room,
a cath lab--
and then send them on their way
with their statin cholesterol
drug, advised to cut their fat,
eat more healthy whole grains.
And they're back.
So those efforts do not
put a stop to this disease,
nor do they even slow it.
They have a very
minor effect, if any.
It's an odd thing.
The pharmaceutical industry
has turned cholesterol
into a huge revenue opportunity.
And it has very little
effect, to reduce cholesterol,
on reducing cardiovascular risk.
So I tried to find better ways.
I was seeking better ways.
You have to start looking
really hard for those answers,
because those answers
are just not out there.
Well, the number one cause,
the most common cause
for a heart attack--
needing stents, bypass surgery,
those sorts of things--
the most common abnormality
is not high cholesterol.
I call that the kindergarten
version of heart disease
causation.
The most common cause is an
excess of small LDL particles.
It's called LDL cholesterol.
But that's a really
dumbed-down version.
It's an excess of small
LDL particles coupled
with some other things, such
as inflammation and high blood
sugars--
very, very common abnormalities.
So I set out to
try to find better
solutions for my patients at
very large cardiology practice.
And I saw what
happened to people
who needed these procedures.
And some die.
It can be a fatal disease, too.
It's not a funny business.
It's not a light matter.
Well, there's only
two things that
cause an excess of small LDL
particles, that leads to heart
attack and heart disease.
And that's grains and sugars--
not my speculation, by the way.
This science is quite
well sorted out.
It's been sorted out
for over 20 years.
But it's not talked about much.
My cynical view is it's
not talked about much
because there's no pot of
gold for the treatment.
It's treated, it's corrected--
not by a little bit,
but entirely--
in the majority of people by
eliminating those two causes.
No grains, no sugars,
and small LDL plummets.
A typical measure would be
1,800 nanomoles per liter.
That's how it's measured.
It's a particle
count per volume.
It drops to zero, or
some other low number.
It's not a little bit better.
It's a ton better.
And you do it for free.
So I did this in my patients.
To my great surprise-- so I
watched their small LDL values
plummet, as you'd expect.
I watched other
good things happen,
like triglyceride levels
drop and blood sugar drop.
But people came back me and
said, I don't understand.
Why did I lose 57 pounds?
I didn't try.
I didn't exercise.
I didn't cut my calories.
I didn't cut my fat.
In fact, you told
me to eat more fat!
And don't push the plate away.
Why did my rheumatoid
arthritis go away?
Why did my ulcerative colitis,
that plagued me for years
and led to bloody diarrhea
and I needed transfusions
every few months,
why did it stop?
Why did my mind fog lift?
Why did my migraines headaches,
that I had five times a week
that were crippling and I
had to take multiple drugs,
go away after just a week?
Why is my acid reflux
now gone after five days?
Why is my irritable
bowel syndrome symptoms
gone within the first week?
So I experienced this outpouring
of incredible stories.
And my first response
was, I don't know.
I have no idea why you had these
transformations in your health
and appearance.
But it became clear on a
large basis, face-to-face
in my practice, that there
was something fishy going on.
So I decided to
try to understand.
What in the world was going on?
I eliminated the
foods that we're told
should dominate the
diet, right, a diet
centered on whole grains.
We're told now that
70% of all calories
should come from grains,
preferably whole grains.
So we're told to eat this food.
When you take it out, all
these incredible things happen.
So I started to dig.
Why would removing the food
that is the darling of the US
dietary guidelines for
Americans, The American Heart
Association, its counterparts
in Australia and the UK,
the favorite of the American
Diabetes Association,
the thing that's held
up as a perfect food
by the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics--
we take that food out and
wonderful things happen.
But why?
What happened in this thing?
And that's when I
started to poke around--
into agribusiness and
agricultural genetics-- to see,
what happened to
wheat, in particular?
This applies to more than wheat.
But I picked on wheat.
I call it the ring leader.
It's the worst of the
worst among all grains.
Well, digging, it
became clear that what
we're being sold
today as modern wheat
is something entirely different
than what it was 40 years ago.
So there was a
very noble effort--
not a dishonest or evil
effort, but a noble effort
to increase the yield per
acre to help feed the world's
hungry.
A noble effort.
But in those efforts,
they bred wheat
over and over and over
again, with various strains.
They bred wheat.
Wheat is a grass.
They bred wheat with
other wild grasses
to extract certain
genetic characteristics.
And then they started to
subject wheat to other methods,
such as the methods
of mutagenesis,
the purposeful
induction of mutations
using toxic
chemicals, radiation,
gamma rays, et cetera.
Problem-- you can't control
the mutations you get.
You can't order up
the mutation you want,
say for better pest
resistance or reduced height.
You just get dozens, perhaps
hundreds of mutations.
If they're not fatal,
the plant survives.
But you've induced
numerous mutations.
And by the way,
this all occurred
prior to the age of
genetic modification,
genetic engineering.
And I point that out
because agribusiness,
who does not like
me very much, says
there's no such thing as
genetically modified wheat.
Davis is wrong.
No, there is no such thing as--
that's right.
Wheat was changed by methods
that pre-date genetic
modification, which
in many instances
are far worse than
genetic modification.
I'm no defender of
I think it's an awful
practice, or at least
the current versions are.
But believe it or not,
it's an improvement
over the methods that were
used to generate modern wheat.
So wheat is now--
it's no longer a 4 and 1/2
foot, five foot tall, two
meter tall--
nearly two meter tall--
traditional plant.
It's an 18-inch tall, short,
thick, stocky, semi-dwarf
strain, they call it.
So that change in
appearance is accompanied
by multiple changes in its
genetics, in it's biochemistry,
and the proteins, in
particular, that are expressed.
And when products
made with high-yield,
semi-dwarf wheat were
put on store shelves
around 1985, the
late '80s, that's
when we saw an explosion
in numerous problems.
Now, that doesn't
prove cause and effect.
But I'm pretty well convinced it
is probably a cause and effect,
because it coincides perfectly
with a dramatic increase
in calorie intake in Australia,
the US, Western Europe, UK.
It coincides perfectly
with an explosion
in autoimmune diseases and in
type 2 diabetes and obesity,
and because we see all those
conditions reverse promptly
with grain elimination.
So a lot of the problems arose
from these changes introduced
into wheat-- and, to some
degree, other related grains,
too, though wheat being
the worst of the worst.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Sure.
Even if viewers don't
accept this notion
that there are unique proteins
created in modern wheat,
like gliadin, wheat
germ and gluten--
there's a whole question
of toxic proteins.
Even if we put all that aside,
there was the inarguable--
I wish I could say I'm a genius.
But it's in every
textbook of nutrition.
If you looked up
the glycemic index
of foods made of wheat flour--
that is, how high
blood sugar ranges over
90 minutes after
consuming a food,
you'll see that the foods with
the highest glycemic index,
the highest potential to
raise your blood sugar,
are all grains.
They're all products made of
wheat flour and corn starch
and corn meal and oats
and other related grains.
And so we've been told to
stack our diets heavily--
low in fat, right, rich
in healthy whole grains.
What we're being
told, in effect,
is follow a lifestyle
that guarantees
that you gain weight and
express higher blood sugars,
and you're on your way
to type 2 diabetes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Numerous changes.
One thing that has not
occurred is an increase
in the gluten content.
That's quite clear.
I mention that
because it's often
claimed that the source
of problems in wheat
is an increase in gluten.
And that's simply not true.
You and I are after truth.
And we don't want
to make up stuff.
So what is true?
What has been changed?
Well, we know lots of
things have been changed.
We know that the structure of
the gliadin protein in wheat
is very different today
than it was 40 years ago.
This is about a lot more than
celiac disease, as you know.
But just the form of gliadin--
people say gluten, but
it's really gliadin--
that provokes celiac
disease, the most potent form
of that protein is enriched
in modern strains of wheat
dramatically, compared
to wheat of 40 years ago.
There is something called
wheat germ agglutinin,
which is a very toxic protein
to your gastrointestinal tract.
It sounds like gluten,
but it's agglutinin.
It's unrelated, except it
comes from the same plant.
Farmers and geneticists
selected strains of wheat
that expressed greater
quantities of wheat germ
agglutinin because
it's also a pesticide.
It kills pests.
It drives off pests.
So they select strains with
higher wheat germ agglutinin
content, more toxic to the
human gastrointestinal tract.
It's a very potent toxin.
It's also a very highly
inflammatory protein,
the little small
quantities that are
absorbed into the bloodstream.
There's also something
called phytates
that are very rich in grains.
And these are very
potent binders
of minerals, particularly
calcium, magnesium, iron,
and zinc.
And so if I eat two slices
of whole wheat bread,
say, in a sandwich, 90%
of the iron in my diet
is prevented from
being absorbed.
And the phytates have
been enriched in grains
because they, likewise,
also provide pest resistance
to the wheat plant.
There's much more.
But in other words, it's
not just about gluten.
So I have to remind people
over and over and over again--
because they say, gluten--
the problem is gluten.
I'm going to go gluten-free.
I'm going to eat those
gluten-free foods.
So I'm trying to
encourage people
to get away from
that kind of thinking
and accept that the
entire package is corrupt.
The entire package of wheat and
other closely related grains
have a whole collection
of toxic components.
So don't think about gluten.
Think about the entire
package as being a flawed food
for human consumption.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There's actually a whole
list of things that happens.
So the gliadin protein
is a direct toxin
to the gastrointestinal tract.
It gets partially digested.
I should point out that
one of the problems
we have with consuming grains--
the seeds of grass, as that's
what grains are, literally--
are they're largely indigestible
because humans are not
fit to consume the
grasses of the world.
That's why-- I don't
know if you guys have
to cut your lawn every summer.
But I have to have my lawn cut
once a week in the summertime.
You'd think we could
save the clippings
and toss it on top of a
salad with a little Roquefort
dressing.
But of course, you can't.
What if you did?
That's been done, of course--
people starving.
People have tried to eat
grasses in their various forms.
Well, you throw it up.
It's very painful--
bloating, diarrhea.
And it comes out undigested.
And that's because humans
cannot digest grasses--
nor any of the components
of grasses, whether it's
the stalk, the husk, the seed.
So grains are the
seeds of grasses.
And they are not entirely,
but largely indigestible.
And that's why so many
of the proteins in grains
are so toxic to humans,
because we can't digest them.
So the gliadin protein
is directly toxic.
It's broken down partially
into small pieces-- peptides.
Those are also highly toxic to
the gastrointestinal system.
That wheat germ agglutinin
protein we talked about
is very toxic to the
gastrointestinal system.
For instance, it blocks the
hormone cholecystokinin.
Now, long word but
all it means is,
I eat something containing fat.
And the fat provokes my
gastrointestinal tract
to release this hormone, CCK.
And that causes your
gallbladder to spit out its bile
to emulsify fats
and your pancreas
to release pancreatic enzymes
to break down the fats--
unless wheat germ agglutinin
is in the vicinity.
It blocks that path--
thereby, can't
get your bile out.
Bile stasis--
gallstones over time.
Your pancreatic enzymes don't
get expressed like they should.
And you don't digest
food properly.
You get acid reflux.
You get heartburn.
You get irritable
bowel syndrome.
Undigested or partially
digested food,
without enough bile
and pancreatic enzymes,
rots in your
gastrointestinal tract.
That has other reactions.
So you get changes in
bowel flora, dysbiosis.
There are other reasons that
people consume grains and have
toxic effects.
There are numerous
other components,
like alpha-amylase
inhibitors, and names
you don't want to know.
Point being, it's
not just gluten.
It's not one thing.
It's really a whole
collection of things.
And sometimes people
think, oh, he's
just making it up, exaggerating.
No.
It all boils down to the fact
that wheat and related grains
are the seeds of grasses.
And Homo sapiens is
just not equipped
to consume grasses
nor their seeds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think lots of reasons.
I won't pretend to be an expert
in sociology and anthropology.
But I could conceive
of a number of reasons.
I hate to admit
this-- it tastes good.
It can taste good.
But if something tastes
good, it doesn't mean
it's therefore good for you.
So that's a thing
that can fool us.
It has an opiate-like effect.
So that gliadin protein,
upon partial digestion--
so if I eat an
egg yolk or an egg
white that's rich in protein,
I break those proteins
down to single amino acids.
That's how humans are supposed
to digest the proteins.
If you eat the proteins
in the seeds of grasses--
wheat and grains--
they're not broken down
into single amino acids.
They're broken down into
pieces, and sometimes
not digested at all.
Like that wheat germ agglutinin
is not digested at all.
It comes out intact.
Gliadin is partially digestible,
to small pieces-- about four
or five amino acids long.
But those little
proteins or peptides
have very unique
amino acid structures.
And that confers an opioid
or opiate-like effect.
That is, it acts like a
morphine or a heroin effect
on your brain.
It's actually been shown to
bind to the opiate receptors
of the human brain.
And by the way, it also
binds to the opiate receptors
in your gastrointestinal tract.
And that's why it causes
constipation, another reason it
causes gastrointestinal upset.
But the opiate effect--
so it causes an addictive
relationship with food.
And it stimulates appetite.
So it creates a need for itself.
Plus, it can yield
large quantities
in a small plot of land.
And that's become
more and more true
as agribusiness
got into the act.
And it worked into
tradition and habit.
So I think there's a lot
of reasons why it's become
so deeply ingrained-- sorry,
"ingrained"-- into human life.
And this is why I think
it's sometimes hard to get
this message across,
because what I'm challenging
is this notion that we
should ever consume grains.
So I think it's easy to show
that modern versions of wheat
and grains have been
dramatically changed
at the hands of geneticists
and agribusiness.
But I'd push that
argument even farther,
that grains were always
a problem for humans.
So you know who does know this?
The anthropologists.
They've known this
for several decades,
that when humans were largely
hunter gatherers or conducted
limited farming, like
growing fruit and those kinds
of plants, there was
almost no tooth decay.
There was very
little bone disease.
And men were taller,
and likewise women.
When humans turned to the
seeds of grasses, grains,
which they did so in desperation
at first, around 10,000,
12,000 years ago-- that is
on a large systematic scale--
there was an explosion
in tooth decay.
Prior to the consumption
of grains, 1% to 3%
of all teeth recovered showed
decay or tooth loss or abscess.
After the incorporation of
grains, 16 to 49% of teeth
showed decay,
abscess formation, or
some other destructive effect.
Men lost five inches in height.
Women lost three
inches in height.
That was an effect that only
lasted several centuries.
There was a partial
accommodation
to the deleterious effects
of grains, but nonetheless,
evidence of some
very peculiar effect.
There was more bone disease.
There was evidence for iron
deficiency anemia showing up.
It shows up in the bones.
The anthropologists call
it porotic hyperostosis.
In other words,
when humans turned
the seeds of grasses for
substance to survive,
an explosion of health
problems appeared.
This is well-established in
the anthropological record.
We also see this very same
phenomenon, not so much today,
but in the last
two centuries, when
primitive cultures, who
were hunters and gatherers,
whether it was in New
Zealand or Northwest Pacific
coast of the US and Canada or
remote areas of Africa or South
America, whenever primitive
cultures that were hunter
and gatherers traded or somehow
obtained grains and sugars
from westernized
people, they likewise
showed an explosion in
diabetes, obesity, hypertension,
tooth decay, facial
malformations, tooth abscess.
In fact, the number
one cause for suicide
among these primitive cultures
when exposed to modern foods,
was a tooth abscess because
it erodes the surface.
It's very painful.
And so those people
didn't have the advantage
of 10,000 years of
partial accommodation
to the toxic effects of grains.
So they show the most
serious ill-effects
they they're exposed
to grains and sugars.
We see this over and over
again in Pima Indians,
in Southwest US.
We see it in other
primitive cultures
who are exposed to
our modern foods.
And then they express all
the diseases of civilization
that we all just
count is bad luck,
but they develop
them explosively.
So we have lots of evidence that
grains, and in this case sugar,
are inappropriate for
human consumption.
Now, that sounds
cynical and dark
but therein lies
an incredible key
to reclaiming your
control over health.
I don't just mean weight
or just type 2 diabetes.
Those are big issues.
But I'm talking about an
incredible landscape of health
problems can be reversed.
Not because we're
treating them and making
lots of billions of dollars
for the drug industry,
Because we're
removing the things
that create the situation
in the first place.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You know, there's an
odd thing about grasses
and that is,
they're promiscuous.
They share genes quite freely.
So rye was the weed
in wheat fields
for many thousands of years.
And so they exchanged genes.
There's a difference, of
course, in taste and appearance.
But if you look at these
two plants genetically,
you'll see that they're nearly
identical, just like just
like a chimpanzee is nearly
identical to a human,
genetically.
It's embarrassing how little
difference there really is.
Likewise, here, rye
essentially equals
wheat and vise versa, likewise,
barley, very extensive
overlap in genetics.
As we get farther down
the line of other grains,
we drift away from some of the
similarities, oats, amaranth,
triticale, millet.
At the most benign end is rice.
Let me restate that.
At the less harmful end
of the spectrum is rice.
But we don't want to
fall under the same trap
that most of the nutrition
community has fallen into.
That is, if something
is less harmful,
it must, therefore, be good.
Well, you can't always
draw that conclusion.
Less harmful is
simply less harmful.
So rice is less harmful because
it's less than 1% protein.
A lot of the toxic
effects of grains
come by way of the protein.
Most modern strains of wheat
yield about 14% to 18% protein.
Rice is less than 1% protein
so its toxic protein components
are in much lesser quantities.
But it also means that
it's mostly starch.
It's like eating sugar.
So eating rice is
like eating sugar.
People say, well, how come
people in Asia are so skinny.
Well, I don't know
if you know this,
but there's a lot more
diabetics, type 2 diabetes,
and obesity in Asia,
now, India, China,
than there is in North America.
They have gone way beyond
us in sheer numbers.
So it's not as if
they're walking
around skinny and healthy.
They're not.
They're developing all the
diseases of civilization
that we have now that they have
more free access to calories,
much of which is rice.
So rice has this problem of
a very high starch content,
thereby lots and lots of
potential to raise blood sugar.
It also has some other issues.
One of the proteins
that is present in rice
is that wheat germ agglutinin.
It's poorly named
because it's in rice,
but it's still called
wheat germ agglutinin.
We've talked about
how toxic it can
be, to the human
gastrointestinal tract
and to the human body, when
absorbed into the bloodstream.
There's also this
recently raised issue
of the arsenic content of rice.
And we know there have been
instances of chronic arsenic
poisoning from consumption
of rice as a staple in diet.
What's being explored now
is, are there more subtle
acute toxic effects?
Our own FDA and USDA
likes to deny that there
are any acute toxic effects.
But they are exploring it.
So the question is open.
So rice is at the
more benign end.
But it's by no means
entirely safe and harmless.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So I would classify-- this
has to be a little bit
scientific, though.
The grasses of the earth
are in the family Poaceae.
The family of grasses are simply
unsuited for human consumption.
There's no way to
make oats healthy.
make it healthy.
All you have to
prove it to yourself
is check a blood sugar.
30 to 60 minutes
after you have a bowl
of stone-ground, organic
oatmeal with no added sugar,
you'll see a
sky-high blood sugar.
Blood sugars of 150 to 500
milligrams per deciliter
are very common after oats.
So no matter what you do, you
can't make the seeds of grasses
healthy or not have some
horrible health consequence.
Now we get into these other
foods that look like grains
but really aren't, like quinoa.
Now, I try to put things in
simple terms for my readers.
And that is jelly
beans are not grains.
But it doesn't necessarily
mean it's good for you.
So we've got to be really
clear in our thinking here.
We have to look at
all foods and ask,
are they truly healthy for us.
Something like
quinoa, which people
often turn to as a replacement,
or buckwheat, which
is not a grain, either.
But they raise blood
sugar substantially.
And so that's a problem.
You know, modern people,
UK, Australia, US,
there are so many type 2
diabetics, prediabetics,
and people who I
call, pre-prediabetic.
High blood sugars
are the norm now.
We've got to undo that.
Having a bowl of quinoa
provides about 51 grams of sugar
equivalents,
carbohydrates, which
will send your blood
sugar sky high and provoke
all the adverse consequence
of a high blood sugar,
insulin resistance,
growth and belly fat,
risk for dementia, cancer, and
heart disease just for a start.
We don't replace a
mistake, seeds of grasses,
with another mistake.
Particularly in our day
and age, we're human.
We have managed to
corrupt our bodies
and change numerous
factors that make
us less tolerant to those
kinds of foods anymore,
such as bowel flora.
You know, one of the
adventures I've had to go down,
this Wheat Belly
experience is that, if you
take wheat and grains
out of the diet,
you don't recover perfect
health by tomorrow.
Because you'll be far
better off and you'll
recover better
health if you also
addressed all the disruptions
that are left in their wake.
And one of those
great disruptions
is bowel flora, the
composition of microorganisms
in your colon.
And so, now we've, for
the last several years,
made a very specific effort
to restore normal bowel flora.
And you know what?
Health gets even better.
You'll lose even more weight.
Your blood sugar
comes down further.
Your blood pressure drops.
Your dreams are deeper.
Your sleep is deeper.
Anxiety is reduced.
There are many other benefits.
And so we have to
correct that disrupted
health effects of grains.
Part of that is not
to over-consume foods
that raise blood sugar.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've seen this play out
many, many, many times, that
is professional athletes,
non-professional athletes
experience dramatic
improvement in performance.
Now, I have to qualify
that because there's
an initial decrement
in performance.
So when you first
go gluten-free--
but I would say a
smarter way to do
it is to go grain-free
and sugar-free
or limit your sugar consumption.
The first week, I
should point out,
there's an opiate
withdrawal syndrome.
So performance does not
improve in the first week.
It degrades in the first
week because you feel awful.
You'll be nauseated,
tired, depressed,
crying, rolled up in a ball.
I mean, it's not pleasant.
But everybody gets through it.
The first week is bad.
For people who perform at a high
level of athletic performance,
your performance will degrade
for four to six weeks.
But then it will exceed
your prior level.
And that's just a curiosity
of human physiology.
And that's because
lots of athletes
drink those energy drinks
and eat those bars.
You've seen all these products.
Eat these bars or drink those
energy drinks full of sugar,
and they do that to
restore liver glycogen.
That's how sugar is
stored in the liver.
But you have to renew
it every 30, 60 minutes
to keep that flow going.
That's why they do it all
through a match, competition,
race, whatever.
When you stop
that, you no longer
have all that glycogen to
draw from in your liver.
It's depleted within
about 40 minutes.
So you're going to
find yourself hitting
a wall very quickly if you
try to run or swim or bike.
And so your body has
to kind of retrain
itself to draw energy from fat.
And that process takes about
four to six weeks to amp up.
But if you get through that
period of poor performance,
your performance will exceed, at
least match and usually exceed,
your prior level of performance.
You'll run faster.
You'll run farther.
You'll bike faster.
In the case of Novak
Djokovic, you'll hit harder.
Now, he seemed to
have gone through this
without that kind of interval.
Some people do.
But the majority
of people will have
that obligatory four to six week
period of decreased performance
before they get to
that better place.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Wonderful, you
know, we need people
like that in the public
eye, who kids look up to
and the public looks up to,
to say these kinds of things.
It's one thing for a doctor
It's a whole other thing
for a Hollywood figure
or a sports figure to
say, because people
will listen to those people.
And you know what?
They're playing it out.
They're showing to us that,
look what happens when
you do these kinds of things.
But it opens up a whole
new book of problems.
And that is, we've built this
world of 7 billion people
reliant on grains.
Now those of us who can afford
to do this in the developed
world can say, we're
not going to eat grains.
But I fear it's not a luxury
that you can take advantage of,
say in Ethiopia or the Sudan.
Those people will always
be reliant on grains
until we somehow
figure out a way
out of this mess we've created.
It was an error in judgment.
There's nobody here at fault.
There's nobody we can blame.
10,000 years ago
we made the mistake
of turning to the seeds
of grasses for food.
We can't blame agribusiness.
I'm not fond of them.
But I don't believe
we can blame them
for introducing these
changes that they introduced
for their own purposes,
pest resistance, increase
yield per acre, et cetera.
But there's no one person
or industry to blame.
It's a confluence of
incredible blunders.
But at the bottom of that is
this spectacular realization
that, if you understand
this basic principle
that it was a mistake and
you undo that mistake,
that you can find
incredible health.
That even to this day, I'm
astounded at the conditions
that reverse with
this lifestyle.
And every day, it doesn't
cease to amaze me then.
And that's what
I do with my day.
I talk to people
who have done this.
And they even look different.
You'll see the
facial inflammation
of grain consumption
disappear, typically
within the first week.
And people will
say, I only lost--
I only lost three to
five pounds, or whatever,
the first week, not
cutting calories,
not exercising, just not eating
grains and limiting sugars.
But their facial
structure will change.
You'll see a deflation
of their cheeks.
You'll see the puffiness
around the eyes reversing.
You'll see the eyes
actually get bigger.
So there's an actual
transformation in appearance.
And thankfully, it
provides this kind
of anti-aging our
youth-preserving effect.
And typically, we'll see
this in lots ladies who
are more open to sharing
their photographs,
that they look 10,
20 years younger.
It's a wonderful effect.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You know, I think it's an
easier question than we think.
It's revert back to the style
of eating that humans have
followed for the first 2.5
million years of our time
on this planet, before we got
it wrong 10,000 years ago,
which is less than one half
of 1% of our time on Earth.
So the time we've spent
consuming the seeds of grasses
is really a very brief time,
speaking anthropologically.
What if we revert
back to those foods?
What did humans eat for
the first 99.6% of our time
on Earth?
Well, we killed animals,
ate their organs,
ate the fat, shellfish,
fish of course,
eggs, poultry, or
we killed birds.
We gathered plants, but not
seeds of grasses, not grasses.
We knew, instinctively,
they're inedible.
If we saw a field of
grass, we wouldn't
start salivating because
it looked so yummy.
Fruit, of course, digging in the
dirt with our sticks and stones
for underground tubers
and roots, berries, nuts,
the things that humans
instinctively regard as food.
If we can return to
a diet like that,
we return to the health
of primitive people.
There's a common fiction that
primitive people die young.
That can be true from
injury and infection,
but they don't die of diabetes,
heart disease, dementia,
and cancer.
So we get rid of the
diseases of civilization
by returning to a diet to
which you have adapted.
To illustrate, I
often tell people,
if you see a insectivorous
toad, a toad that likes
to eat insects, he's happy.
If you see a cow
that likes to graze,
that's what it's adapted to
eating, grass and fodder.
What if you gave it,
instead, shellfish to eat
or something it's
unfamiliar with?
It'd probably very
sick, quite quickly.
What if you don't like
the fact that lions
kill gazelle and wildebeests
and gore them, eat their organs,
and eat their meat
to survive, and you
made them eat spinach and kale?
You'd have a dead lion.
Same with humans, we follow
an adaptive script and diet.
And if you veer off that
script, funny things happen.
That funny thing could
be called obesity,
it could be called type
2 or type 1 diabetes,
it could be called autoimmune
disease, it could be dementia,
it could be cancer,
it could be any number
of other hundreds to
thousands of human conditions
that are almost
unknown in populations
that follow the dietary
script which were adapted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I don't think anybody knows.
It's an interesting observation,
these little pockets
of exception.
And I don't know why.
I suspect they'll prove
to be genetically unique,
that this kind of-- because
they're often very small
pockets of inbred
with some inbreeding.
And so I suspect
that they somehow
acquired a protective
mechanism, genetic mechanism.
But to my knowledge, no
one's figured that out yet.
What I don't think we should
do is regard the exception
as disproving the rule.
Because the rule applies
99.9 of the rest of us
do experience these conditions.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I cringe at the ways
that humans have managed
to profit from these mistakes.
Those mistakes could
be the consumption
of the seeds of grasses, it
could be the over-reliance
on sugary drinks because
of the very poor science
that prove-- never
did, by the way,
prove that we need sugars
to perform in sports.
That's simply not true.
That we need gluten-free
foods, if we go gluten-free,
that we need billions
and billions of dollars
of prescription drugs to
deal with the diseases
of civilization,
none of that is true.
The dirty little
secret is a lot of this
is sustained because it
is hugely profitable.
It is hugely profitable
to be wrong and follow
a diet low in fat, rich
in healthy whole grains,
take your statin drugs,
your blood pressure drugs,
your acid reflux drugs,
your anti-depressants,
drink your sports
drinks for keeping up
performance in sports.
In other words, we've
created entire industries
that thrive on our mistake
that we've made as a species.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You know, what I find
is, more and more,
the things that really pack
a wallop in restoring health,
all make evolutionary
or adaptive sense.
So to illustrate, if I said
you, eating no wheat or grains
provides incredible
outsized benefit.
Why would that be true?
Well, we didn't eat grains for
the first 99.6% of our time
on Earth.
What if we said, vitamin D seems
second only to wheat and grain
elimination as this
wonderfully powerful--
why is that?
Well, modern people
wear clothes.
We work indoors.
We've migrated far
north and south
of the equator, farther
and farther away
from direct sun, year round.
And the older we get, the
more longevity there is,
the more we lose the capacity
to activate vitamin D.
And we don't like to eat
the organs of animals,
like the liver.
So for a variety
of reasons, we've
lost our vitamin D status.
And restoring vitamin
D worked because it
was something we should
have been getting all along.
So the things that really
pack a wallop in health
are things that make, what
I call, adaptive sense.
As compared to say something
like, ashwagandha or turmeric,
they can be beneficial.
But the benefits
are teensy-weensy
compared to the huge benefits
of these very simple, adaptively
appropriate strategies.
Another thing
happens when you put
this handful of adaptive
strategies together.
These are the strategies I
talk about a lot, wheat grain
elimination, limitation
on sugars and carbs,
omega 3 fatty acids
from fish oil,
vitamin D restoration,
iodine supplementation,
and a couple of others, a
cultivation of bowel flora.
You do all these things.
It sounds like a lot, but
it's really not a lot.
You do all these things,
something even more incredible
happens.
There is a very,
very powerful synergy
among all those factors.
That collection of factors put
together, I call it 2 plus 2
equals 11 effect.
It combines this
powerful synergy
in turning around numerous
health conditions.
And so there's something
magical and wonderful
about that combination
of strategies.
And that's what I'm seeing.
I'm always on the lookout for
other strategies we should add.
But now my litmus
test in deciding
whether we should
add new strategy
is, does this work
in primitive humans?
Did it work for the first
99.6% of our time on Earth.
Or is it something put
there by somebody else
because they think it
might be beneficial
or some government guideline
says they're beneficial
or somebody's profits from it.
So let's do things
because they really work,
not because some ulterior
motive's entered the picture.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You know, it become very
clear, you're right,
in the last few
years that we have
managed to screw above
bowel flora colossally.
We've managed to screw up
a lot of things, right.
I don't mean you and me.
But I'm talking about us,
as a society, as a species.
So when I was a kid, when we're
kids, you go out to a field,
the field was filled
with grasshoppers.
I haven't see a
grasshopper in decades.
We wiped them out, or
nearly wiped them out,
because of herbicides
and pesticides and things
like that.
So we've corrupted our
environment, global climate
change, et cetera.
We've done the same in
our internal environment,
our microbiome, our gut flora.
Grains disrupt bowel flora.
Sugars disrupt bowel flora.
How about, occasional
antibiotics?
They disrupt bowel flora.
How about antibiotic residues
or chlorine and fluoride
in your drinking water?
They disrupt bowel flora.
How about just the chemicals
that are in water and in air
because your neighbor
was spraying his lawn
with herbicide?
Or the groundwater is still
contaminated with dioxin.
All these things
have contributed
to changing our microbiome.
And the composition
of microbiome
is essential for health.
The most dramatic
illustration of how far
we've drifted in
our gut flora is
when our gut flora
has been compared
to the two primitive societies
who have been unaffected
by antibiotics, grains, sugars.
And that's the Hadza in
Africa and the Matss in Peru.
Now those are two
different continents.
They don't know each other.
They don't go to stores.
They don't go on the internet.
Yet they have very similar
bowel flora entirely different
from ours.
They have species
we don't even have,
like spirochetes, that we
barely have any at all.
Yet, they are filled with them.
So it suggests that's the
true Stone Age bowel flora.
When you compare their
bowel flora to ours,
it's clear we've drifted
very, very far away.
And so what's not
clear is whether we
have to go back all the way
to that kind of bowel flora
to be healthy.
What I've been doing,
as a practical matter
for bowel flora is remove--
I encourage people think of
their bowel flora as a garden.
So if I'm going to
have a spring garden,
I'm going to prepare the soil.
I'm going to plant my seeds
for cucumbers or whatever,
tomatoes.
I'm going to water and
fertilize it for the season
and then have a
wonderful little garden.
Same thing happens
in your bowel flora.
Prepare the soil.
That is taking away the things
that disrupt the garden,
like chlorinated water.
Filter you water.
Don't eat grains.
Don't eat sugars.
Plant the seeds.
Seeds come in two forms,
multi-species, high-potency
probiotics, those are helpful.
Though we're still even
unclear what species
should be in there.
But you still get very good
products on the market now.
And fermented foods,
lactate fermented foods,
like sauerkraut, and other
fermented veggies, and kefir,
and yogurts.
You can even make yogurt with
coconut milk, so it's no dairy.
Those reseed the intestinal
tract with new species,
like lactobacillus,
bifidobacteria,
and leuconostoc.
And then, you have to water
and fertilize your garden.
Those are the prebiotic fibers
that microorganisms consume,
but you can't.
You can ingest them.
But you can't digest them.
And the microorganisms do.
That's what gets a bit strange,
a little bit complicated.
Because, you know,
modern people don't
want to go out into
the forest to dig
in the dirt for underground
roots and tubers.
So I tell people
that because when
we talk about the source of
prebiotic fibers, people say,
what?
These are crazy.
They're green, unripe bananas
and raw, white potatoes,
and inulin, and
fructooligosaccaride powders.
And the point is, we're trying
to recreate for convenience
what we should have
been doing all along,
which is digging in the dirt
for roots and tubers and then
consuming them, just at the
Hadza and Matss still do,
by the way.
But modern life, frozen ground,
right, pressures of your life,
you don't want to it.
So we recreate them by consuming
these prebiotic fibers.
And health is taken
to another level.
Performance is taken to a higher
level by taking these efforts.
Bowel regularity, effortless.
No other fibers required.
You surely don't need cellulose
fiber, like in bran cereal.
That's nonsense.
That's just bulk.
That's like eating sawdust.
HDL cholesterol rises.
Triglycerides drop.
Blood pressure drops.
Blood sugar drops.
Insulin levels drop.
Visceral fat is lost.
You feel better.
Your thinking is clear.
Your dreams are deep.
Your sleep is-- in other
words, this whole landscape
of wonderful effects develops,
compounding the benefits
of grain elimination.
That's why I say there's this
wonderful, wonderful synergy
that develops when you do
the entire package of some
of these, what I call, adaptive
appropriate strategies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
People who craft
nutritional guidelines
fell into a trap of poor logic.
And that is, if you replace
something bad, white flour
products, with
something less bad,
whole grains with B
vitamins and fiber intact,
and there's an apparent
health benefit--
and that's true, by the way--
there is less weight gain,
less type 2 diabetes,
less heart disease,
less colon cancer.
They concluded that a whole
bunch the less bad thing
must, therefore, be good.
Let's apply that flawed
logic to cigarettes.
If I said to you, these
full-tar, unfiltered cigarettes
are terrible for you.
These filtered,
low-tar cigarettes
are less bad for you.
And we showed there was maybe
less lung cancer from it.
Should we conclude
by that exercise
that smoking a whole bunch of
low-tar, filtered cigarettes
therefore good for you?
It sounds stupid when
you play it out that way.
But that's the logic,
the flawed logic,
used in the epidemiological
studies used
to support the consumption
of whole grains.
The real question, the next
question, should have been,
what happens when
you remove grains?
And that's where you see the
astounding, spectacular things,
already published, by the
way, in clinical trials.
So I didn't have
to make this up.
Those trials are out there.
They're often not
regarded as being a proof
of this grain-free lifestyle.
But if you take all grains and
sugars out of the diet and type
2 diabetes goes away,
that's pretty good proof.
No studies have been
done, by the way.
Unfortunately, people who
craft dietary guidelines
took that flawed
logic and said, it
must mean that lots and
lots of whole grains
must therefore be good for you.
So they got it so
colossally wrong that we now
have a worldwide epidemic.
Because, unfortunately, a lot
of other agencies in the UK,
Australia, Western Europe,
looked at the US dietary
guidelines set the pace
because a lot of the research
came from here.
And so we have, in effect,
in the US, exported
type 2 diabetes, obesity,
and autoimmune diseases,
and other conditions,
to other countries
by this colossal
mistake we all made.
Sadly, I don't think
we'll ever hear
a retraction or an apology.
I don't think we'll ever hear
the US Department of Health
and Human Services that drafts
the US dietary guidelines,
nor the USDA, nor the
Heart Association,
nor the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics,
I don't think we'll
ever hear this.
We made a mistake
on a grand scale.
Not only was our diet
advice ineffective,
it contributed to the world's
epidemics of diabetes, obesity,
and autoimmune disease.
We're never going to hear
that because, particularly
in the US, there's lots of
litigation-hungry people, not
to mention lost revenues
and contributions
to some organizations.
So I don't think we'll ever
hear a retraction or an apology.
What we're seeing is
happening already, by the way.
We're seeing a
step-by-step pulling back.
About a year and a
half ago, we heard
that there's really no need to
limit cholesterol in the diet.
Because there really was never
any data to show that anyway.
Oh, there's no reason to
limit total fat in the diet.
Which was a big revelation,
but it was so quiet,
almost no one heard it.
But the Institute of
Medicine said, well,
there's no need to
limit total fat.
So little by little, all
that awful advice that
became the food pyramid,
the food plate, et cetera,
is being pulled back.
But it's being
done very quietly,
I think to not draw attention
and fire and litigation
and lawsuits, and
those sorts of things.
It may turn out
that in 50 years,
we may hear national
agencies say, you know,
we've reviewed the science.
We're not sure you
should eat grains.
They're pretty darn toxic.
And you certainly
should not be drinking
those sugary, sugary
sodas and soft drinks.
You should be eating
real foods, rich in fat,
including rich in saturated fat.
Make it organic
whenever possible.
We might hear that in 50 years.
But I think most of us, who
are eager for high performance
and health, aren't
willing to wait
for government
and other agencies
to own up to their huge mistake.
Because this is something
you can do on your own.
You don't need your doctor to
go grain-free and sugar-free.
It's something you
can do on your own.
In fact, your doctor's
probably not as smart as you
when it comes to diet.
We live in this age of rapid
information dissemination
and open discussion,
social media,
and sharing experiences
is wonderful,
while the doctor still
follows the stuff
he learned 20 years
ago, 30 years ago,
and still thinks that
drugs and procedures are
the only solutions to health.
And I think this
revelation is that many
of the diseases of
civilization are
nothing more than the
evidence of the mistakes we've
made as a society.
Let's undo those simple mistakes
and just reclaim health.
I can tell you, having done
this many hundreds of thousands
of times, it's as easy as that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we talked about how
gliadin is partially digested,
the small peptides
that have opioid
or opiate-like properties.
Well, here's where that
gets a little tricky.
And it took a long
time to be figured out.
That's because the effect of
those gliadin-derived opioid
peptides differ depending on
individual susceptibility.
So if you're a kid with autistic
spectrum disorder or attention
deficit disorder,
those peptides can
trigger behavioral outbursts
and erode your attention span.
If you're prone
to depression, it
can trigger depression,
and suicidal thoughts, very
powerful effect, by the way.
If you have schizophrenia, it
doesn't cause schizophrenia,
it just causes you
to be more paranoid
and hear more voices,
auditory hallucinations.
If you are prone to bipolar
illness or manic depression,
you're more prone to have worse
highs of your bipolar illness.
If you have none of
those conditions,
you're just an everyday Joe
without those conditions,
it only triggers mind fog
and appetite stimulation.
We see that to the most extreme
degree of people bulimia
and binge eating disorder.
Those people exposed
to gliadin derived
opioid peptides have obsessive
relationships with food.
Those are the people
you find perched
in front their
refrigerators at 3:00
in the morning gorging
on the birthday cake.
So most of us don't
have those effects.
But it is an illustration of
how the opioid peptides of wheat
and grains have
peculiar effects that
vary depending on unique,
individual susceptibility.
And the majority
of those problems
go away when you stop consuming
these things, easy as can be.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we don't want to be guilty
of that same mistake made
by all government agencies
and other people who
provide dietary advice.
And that is, if
something is less bad,
it must therefore be good.
So the grains, the
seeds of grasses,
are all bad to varying degrees.
The worst of the worst, modern
high-yield semi-dwarf wheat.
A little less harmful,
traditional strains of wheat.
And other strains of
wheat-related grains
like bulgur and triticale.
Little less harmful, or
equally harmful, I should say,
rye and barley because
they're so genetically closely
related to wheat.
Then we get the corn,
oats, millet, sorghum.
They are also harmful.
They're not as glaringly
harmful as wheat
because the proteins
are not quite as toxic.
You know, if a farmer allows his
cows to eat immature sorghum,
a little bit not
fully ripened, they
die of sudden cardiac death.
I mean, we're not
talking about--
we're talking about some
very serious effects.
But ripe sorghum, not quite as
toxic, but very indigestible.
All the agricultural
geneticists know this.
We get all the way to the least
harmful, but not benign, rice
like we talked about,
because it's mostly starch,
very little protein, but still
has problems including arsenic.
So I don't know
of any grain that
doesn't have some very
serious issues attached to it.
But I have to remind
everybody over and over
and over again, never
view less bad as being
necessarily the same as good.
You know, I think if we got
nutritionists and dietitians
that just embrace that single,
that single sequence of logic,
you will see numerous errors in
nutritional science going away.
Because you'll see this
mistake being made over
and over and over,
another mistake
that applies that sequence
of logic-- that flawed
sequence a logic.
High glycemic index
foods are bad for you.
Low glycemic index
foods, less bad for you.
A whole bunch of low
glycemic index foods
must, therefore,
be good for you.
Well, what they don't tell you
is what they should have said,
high glycemic index
foods are bad for you.
Low glycemic index foods are
a little less bad for you.
But low glycemic
index foods still
raise blood sugar sky high.
So we never want to endorse
that awful logic of less bad
being the same as good.
[MUSIC PLAYING]